README.md, before:

# Mini Pupper ROS Packages

ROS packages for Mini Pupper.

![Mini Pupper CC Max Morse](imgs/1.jpg)

Mini Pupper is an open source dog-shaped 12-DOF quadruped robot,supporting ROS (Robot Operating System). With ROS, you can explore SLAM and Navigation functions with Mini Pupper. The controller of Mini Pupper's ROS packages is based on [champ](https://github.com/chvmp/champ) project, and we made some changes to SLAM and Navigation functions.

Tested on
* Ubuntu 20.04 (ROS Noetic)
* Ubuntu 18.04 (ROS Melodic).

## 1.Installation Guide
We recommend you explore Mini Pupper with ROS network, make sure your PC and Mini Pupper have connected to the same WiFi.

### 1.1 PC Setup
**PC Setup corresponds to PC (your desktop or laptop PC) for controlling Mini Pupper remotely. Do not apply these commands to your Mini Pupper.**

#### 1.1.1 Cartographer ROS packages installation
Our SLAM and Navigation functions are based on [cartographer_ros](https://google-cartographer-ros.readthedocs.io/en/latest/compilation.html). 
```sh
cd ~
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y python3-wstool python3-rosdep ninja-build stow
mkdir carto_ws
cd carto_ws
wstool init src
wstool merge -t src https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cartographer-project/cartographer_ros/master/cartographer_ros.rosinstall
wstool update -t src
sudo rosdep init
rosdep update
rosdep install --from-paths src --ignore-src --rosdistro=${ROS_DISTRO} -y
src/cartographer/scripts/install_abseil.sh
sudo apt-get remove ros-${ROS_DISTRO}-abseil-cpp
catkin_make_isolated --install --use-ninja
source install_isolated/setup.bash
```
#### 1.1.2 Mini Pupper ROS packages installation

```sh
cd <your_ws>/src
git clone --recursive https://github.com/mangdangroboticsclub/minipupper_ros
cd ..
rosdep install --from-paths src --ignore-src -r -y
catkin_make
source <your_ws>/devel/setup.bash
```

#### 1.1.3 Network Setup
Connect your PC and Mini Pupper to the same WiFi and find the assigned IP address with the command below.
```sh
ifconfig
```
Open the file and update ROS IP settings with commands below.
```sh
sudo gedit ~/.bashrc
```
Then add your Master and hostname config.

![ROS_IP](imgs/ROS_IP_1.png)

For example
```sh
export ROS_MASTER_URI=http://192.168.1.106:11311
export ROS_HOSTNAME=192.168.1.106
```


### 1.2 Mini Pupper Setup
**Mini Pupper Setup corresponds to the Raspberry Pi on your Mini Pupper.**

#### 1.2.1 Hardware Dependencies
You should first install dependencies of servos, battery moniter and display screen. </br>
See [minipupper_ros_bsp](https://github.com/mangdangroboticsclub/minipupper_ros_bsp).
#### 1.2.2 PS4 Joystick interface installation
PS4 Joystick interface in ROS is based on [ps4-ros](https://github.com/solbach/ps4-ros) project. 
```sh
pip install ds4drv
sudo apt install ros-noetic-joy
sudo wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/chrippa/ds4drv/master/udev/50-ds4drv.rules -O /etc/udev/rules.d/50-ds4drv.rules
sudo udevadm control --reload-rules
sudo udevadm trigger
sudo reboot
```
Then go into pairing mode with PS4: Playstation button + share button for ~5 sec.
Run $ds4drv from command line until PS4 Joystick is connected.
```sh
ds4drv
```
This will output something like "Created devices /dev/input/jsX".
Then give the permissions to the device
```sh
sudo chmod a+rw /dev/input/jsX
```

#### 1.2.3 Mini Pupper ROS packages installation
**Then you can install the ROS packages for Mini Pupper. This should be installed both on Mini Pupper and your PC.**

```sh
cd <your_ws>/src
git clone --recursive https://github.com/mangdangroboticsclub/minipupper_ros
cd minipupper_ros/champ
# it's not recommend to compile gazebo on raspberry pi
sudo rm -rf champ_gazebo
cd ..
cd ..
cd ..
rosdep install --from-paths src --ignore-src -r -y
catkin_make
source <your_ws>/devel/setup.bash
```

#### 1.2.4 Network Setup
Connect your PC and Mini Pupper to the same WiFi and find the assigned IP address with commands below.
```sh
ifconfig
```
Open the file and update the ROS IP settings with the command below.
```sh
sudo gedit ~/.bashrc
```
Then add your Master and hostname config.

![ROS_IP](imgs/ROS_IP_2.png)

For example
```sh
export ROS_MASTER_URI=http://192.168.1.106:11311
export ROS_HOSTNAME=192.168.1.107
```

## 2.Quick Start Guide
### 2.1 Calibration
Through this script, you can calibrate the angle of every servo in one turn. Just input the angles.</br>
The hip and shank should be horizontal, and the ham should be vertical.
```sh
roslaunch servo_interface calibrate.launch
```
Make sure Mini Pupper looks like this after calibrating.
![calibrtaion](imgs/calibration.jpg)
### 2.2 Walking
#### 2.2.1 Run the base driver
**You should run this command on Mini Pupper**
```sh
roslaunch mini_pupper bringup.launch
```
If Mini Pupper didn't stand as what you expect, you can edit calibration.yaml in servo_interface/config/calibration to fix the angles.
#### 2.2.2 Control Mini Pupper
There are two options to control Mini Pupper:

1.using keyboard</br>
![keyboard](imgs/keyboard.gif)
</br>
**It's recommended to run this command on PC.**
```sh
roslaunch champ_teleop teleop.launch
```

2.using PS4 joystick

**It's recommended to run this command on Mini Pupper.**

**Don't run this command while using move_base because even if you are doing nothing with the joystick, it would still send cmd_vel with all the values as zero.**
```sh
roslaunch ps4_interface ps4_interface.launch
```
Then you can go into pairing mode with PS4: Playstation button + share button for ~5 sec.
* The left lever controls the linear velocity of x and y axis.
* The right lever controls the angular velocity of z axis.
* The arrow key controls the standing height and the angle of roll axis.
* If you are pressing R2, then the right lever will control the angle of pitch and yaw axis.
* If you are pressing L2, then the robot will turn to default state. 


### 2.3 SLAM
#### 2.3.1 Run the base driver
**You should run this command on Mini Pupper**
```sh
roslaunch mini_pupper bringup.launch
```

#### 2.3.2 Run Cartographer
**You should run this command on PC**
**If you are using gazebo, set the param /use_sim_time to true in the launch file.**
```sh
roslaunch mini_pupper slam.launch
```
Then you can use keyboard or joystick to control your Mini Pupper walking around and creating a map. To save the map, run these commands below.
```sh
rosservice call /finish_trajectory 0
rosservice call /write_state "{filename: '${HOME}/map.pbstream'}"
rosrun cartographer_ros cartographer_pbstream_to_ros_map -map_filestem=${HOME}/map -pbstream_filename=${HOME}/map.pbstream -resolution=0.05
```
Remember to edit map.yaml</br>
The first line should be
```yaml
image: map.pgm
```
Then, copy map.pbstream, map.pgm and map.yaml files you just saved to <your_ws>/src/minipupper_ros/mini_pupper/maps

### 2.4 Navigation
#### 2.4.1 Change the map file
Before running navigation, you should first change the launch file with the map you created. 
```sh
roscd mini_pupper/launch
sudo gedit navigate.launch
```
Then change arg of the map_file and pbstream_file.
![map_file](imgs/map_file.png)
![pbstream_file](imgs/pbstream_file.png)
#### 2.4.2 Run the base driver
**You should run this command on Mini Pupper**
```sh
roslaunch mini_pupper bringup.launch
```

#### 2.4.3 Run Cartographer(for localization) and Move_Base
**You should run this command on PC**
**If you are using gazebo, set the param /use_sim_time to true in the launch file.**
```sh
roslaunch mini_pupper navigate.launch
```

## 3.Simulation
You can also play with Mini Pupper with only your laptop.</br>
![nav](imgs/instruction.gif)
```sh
roslaunch mini_pupper gazebo.launch
```

## 4.LCD Screen
```sh
python3 ~/minipupper_ros_bsp/mangdang/LCD/demo.py
```
We also made s simple ROS interface of the LCD screen, which subscribes sensor_msgs/Image.
```sh
rosrun display_interface display_interface.py
```

## 4.Computer Vision

We've tested the integration with OAK-D-LITE. It's a great platform to run some deep learning models.</br>
You can follow these commands to try this demo(make sure you have connected OAK-D-LITE to Mini Pupper).</br>

```sh
# Terminal 1
roslaunch mini_pupper bringup.launch
 
# Terminal 2
roslaunch depthai_examples mobile_publisher.launch
 
# Terminal 3
rosrun mini_pupper_detect oak_detect.py
```
</br>

Just use a bottle to let Mini Pupper look at you :)</br>
(Here's the cool guy who launched this demo successfully.)</br>
[https://www.techlife-hacking.com/?p=1197](https://www.techlife-hacking.com/?p=1197)</br>
![obj](imgs/obj.gif)
</br>
Also, if you want to do some CV projects, you can add a usb camera on Mini Pupper, and subscribe the comressed image on your PC.</br>
The transportation of raw image through network will be too slow, you may need to use image_transport to turn the compressed image to normal image and then use it.

```sh
rosrun image_transport republish compressed in:=(in_base_topic) raw out:=(out_base_topic)
```

Commit message:

update pc setup steps to match what I had to do on 20.04

README.md, after:

# Mini Pupper ROS Packages

ROS packages for Mini Pupper.

![Mini Pupper CC Max Morse](imgs/1.jpg)

Mini Pupper is an open source dog-shaped 12-DOF quadruped robot,supporting ROS (Robot Operating System). With ROS, you can explore SLAM and Navigation functions with Mini Pupper. The controller of Mini Pupper's ROS packages is based on [champ](https://github.com/chvmp/champ) project, and we made some changes to SLAM and Navigation functions.

Tested on
* Ubuntu 20.04 (ROS Noetic)
* Ubuntu 18.04 (ROS Melodic).

## 1.Installation Guide
We recommend you explore Mini Pupper with ROS network, make sure your PC and Mini Pupper have connected to the same WiFi.

### 1.1 PC Setup
**PC Setup corresponds to PC (your desktop or laptop PC) for controlling Mini Pupper remotely. Do not apply these commands to your Mini Pupper.**

#### 1.1.1 Cartographer ROS packages installation
Our SLAM and Navigation functions are based on [cartographer_ros](https://google-cartographer-ros.readthedocs.io/en/latest/compilation.html). 
```sh
cd ~
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y python3-wstool python3-rosdep python3-empy libudev-dev ninja-build stow
mkdir carto_ws
cd carto_ws
wstool init src
wstool merge -t src https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cartographer-project/cartographer_ros/master/cartographer_ros.rosinstall
wstool update -t src
sudo rosdep init
rosdep update
rosdep install --from-paths src --ignore-src --rosdistro=${ROS_DISTRO} -y
src/cartographer/scripts/install_abseil.sh
sudo apt-get remove ros-${ROS_DISTRO}-abseil-cpp
. /opt/ros/${ROS_DISTRO}/setup.sh
catkin_make_isolated --install --use-ninja
source install_isolated/setup.bash
```
#### 1.1.2 Mini Pupper ROS packages installation

This should be done in a workspace *outside* of the carto workspace
```sh
cd <your_ws>/src
git clone --recursive https://github.com/mangdangroboticsclub/minipupper_ros
cd ..
rosdep install --from-paths src --ignore-src -r -y
catkin_make
source <your_ws>/devel/setup.bash
```

#### 1.1.3 Network Setup
Connect your PC and Mini Pupper to the same WiFi and find the assigned IP address with the command below.
```sh
ifconfig
```
Open the file and update ROS IP settings with commands below.
```sh
sudo gedit ~/.bashrc
```
Then add your Master and hostname config.

![ROS_IP](imgs/ROS_IP_1.png)

For example
```sh
export ROS_MASTER_URI=http://192.168.1.106:11311
export ROS_HOSTNAME=192.168.1.106
```


### 1.2 Mini Pupper Setup
**Mini Pupper Setup corresponds to the Raspberry Pi on your Mini Pupper.**

#### 1.2.1 Hardware Dependencies
You should first install dependencies of servos, battery moniter and display screen. </br>
See [minipupper_ros_bsp](https://github.com/mangdangroboticsclub/minipupper_ros_bsp).
#### 1.2.2 PS4 Joystick interface installation
PS4 Joystick interface in ROS is based on [ps4-ros](https://github.com/solbach/ps4-ros) project. 
```sh
pip install ds4drv
sudo apt install ros-noetic-joy
sudo wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/chrippa/ds4drv/master/udev/50-ds4drv.rules -O /etc/udev/rules.d/50-ds4drv.rules
sudo udevadm control --reload-rules
sudo udevadm trigger
sudo reboot
```
Then go into pairing mode with PS4: Playstation button + share button for ~5 sec.
Run $ds4drv from command line until PS4 Joystick is connected.
```sh
ds4drv
```
This will output something like "Created devices /dev/input/jsX".
Then give the permissions to the device
```sh
sudo chmod a+rw /dev/input/jsX
```

#### 1.2.3 Mini Pupper ROS packages installation
**Then you can install the ROS packages for Mini Pupper. This should be installed both on Mini Pupper and your PC.**

```sh
cd <your_ws>/src
git clone --recursive https://github.com/mangdangroboticsclub/minipupper_ros
cd minipupper_ros/champ
# it's not recommend to compile gazebo on raspberry pi
sudo rm -rf champ_gazebo
cd ..
cd ..
cd ..
rosdep install --from-paths src --ignore-src -r -y
catkin_make
source <your_ws>/devel/setup.bash
```

#### 1.2.4 Network Setup
Connect your PC and Mini Pupper to the same WiFi and find the assigned IP address with commands below.
```sh
ifconfig
```
Open the file and update the ROS IP settings with the command below.
```sh
sudo gedit ~/.bashrc
```
Then add your Master and hostname config.

![ROS_IP](imgs/ROS_IP_2.png)

For example
```sh
export ROS_MASTER_URI=http://192.168.1.106:11311
export ROS_HOSTNAME=192.168.1.107
```

## 2.Quick Start Guide
### 2.1 Calibration
Through this script, you can calibrate the angle of every servo in one turn. Just input the angles.</br>
The hip and shank should be horizontal, and the ham should be vertical.
```sh
roslaunch servo_interface calibrate.launch
```
Make sure Mini Pupper looks like this after calibrating.
![calibrtaion](imgs/calibration.jpg)
### 2.2 Walking
#### 2.2.1 Run the base driver
**You should run this command on Mini Pupper**
```sh
roslaunch mini_pupper bringup.launch
```
If Mini Pupper didn't stand as what you expect, you can edit calibration.yaml in servo_interface/config/calibration to fix the angles.
#### 2.2.2 Control Mini Pupper
There are two options to control Mini Pupper:

1.using keyboard</br>
![keyboard](imgs/keyboard.gif)
</br>
**It's recommended to run this command on PC.**
```sh
roslaunch champ_teleop teleop.launch
```

2.using PS4 joystick

**It's recommended to run this command on Mini Pupper.**

**Don't run this command while using move_base because even if you are doing nothing with the joystick, it would still send cmd_vel with all the values as zero.**
```sh
roslaunch ps4_interface ps4_interface.launch
```
Then you can go into pairing mode with PS4: Playstation button + share button for ~5 sec.
* The left lever controls the linear velocity of x and y axis.
* The right lever controls the angular velocity of z axis.
* The arrow key controls the standing height and the angle of roll axis.
* If you are pressing R2, then the right lever will control the angle of pitch and yaw axis.
* If you are pressing L2, then the robot will turn to default state. 


### 2.3 SLAM
#### 2.3.1 Run the base driver
**You should run this command on Mini Pupper**
```sh
roslaunch mini_pupper bringup.launch
```

#### 2.3.2 Run Cartographer
**You should run this command on PC**
**If you are using gazebo, set the param /use_sim_time to true in the launch file.**
```sh
roslaunch mini_pupper slam.launch
```
Then you can use keyboard or joystick to control your Mini Pupper walking around and creating a map. To save the map, run these commands below.
```sh
rosservice call /finish_trajectory 0
rosservice call /write_state "{filename: '${HOME}/map.pbstream'}"
rosrun cartographer_ros cartographer_pbstream_to_ros_map -map_filestem=${HOME}/map -pbstream_filename=${HOME}/map.pbstream -resolution=0.05
```
Remember to edit map.yaml</br>
The first line should be
```yaml
image: map.pgm
```
Then, copy map.pbstream, map.pgm and map.yaml files you just saved to <your_ws>/src/minipupper_ros/mini_pupper/maps

### 2.4 Navigation
#### 2.4.1 Change the map file
Before running navigation, you should first change the launch file with the map you created. 
```sh
roscd mini_pupper/launch
sudo gedit navigate.launch
```
Then change arg of the map_file and pbstream_file.
![map_file](imgs/map_file.png)
![pbstream_file](imgs/pbstream_file.png)
#### 2.4.2 Run the base driver
**You should run this command on Mini Pupper**
```sh
roslaunch mini_pupper bringup.launch
```

#### 2.4.3 Run Cartographer(for localization) and Move_Base
**You should run this command on PC**
**If you are using gazebo, set the param /use_sim_time to true in the launch file.**
```sh
roslaunch mini_pupper navigate.launch
```

## 3.Simulation
You can also play with Mini Pupper with only your laptop.</br>
![nav](imgs/instruction.gif)
```sh
roslaunch mini_pupper gazebo.launch
```

## 4.LCD Screen
```sh
python3 ~/minipupper_ros_bsp/mangdang/LCD/demo.py
```
We also made s simple ROS interface of the LCD screen, which subscribes sensor_msgs/Image.
```sh
rosrun display_interface display_interface.py
```

## 4.Computer Vision

We've tested the integration with OAK-D-LITE. It's a great platform to run some deep learning models.</br>
You can follow these commands to try this demo(make sure you have connected OAK-D-LITE to Mini Pupper).</br>

```sh
# Terminal 1
roslaunch mini_pupper bringup.launch
 
# Terminal 2
roslaunch depthai_examples mobile_publisher.launch
 
# Terminal 3
rosrun mini_pupper_detect oak_detect.py
```
</br>

Just use a bottle to let Mini Pupper look at you :)</br>
(Here's the cool guy who launched this demo successfully.)</br>
[https://www.techlife-hacking.com/?p=1197](https://www.techlife-hacking.com/?p=1197)</br>
![obj](imgs/obj.gif)
</br>
Also, if you want to do some CV projects, you can add a usb camera on Mini Pupper, and subscribe the comressed image on your PC.</br>
The transportation of raw image through network will be too slow, you may need to use image_transport to turn the compressed image to normal image and then use it.

```sh
rosrun image_transport republish compressed in:=(in_base_topic) raw out:=(out_base_topic)
```
